---
layout: post
title:  "About me"
linktitle: "&#8594; More about my interests"
date:   2022-04-11 19:49:49 -0400
excerpt_separator: <!-- more -->
---


{%if page.excerpt != nil %}
## About me
{%endif%}

{%if page.excerpt == nil %}
Welcome to my website!{%endif%}

My name is Merlijn. I am currently a PhD student with [Corina Tarnita][corina]{:target="_blank"} in the [Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology][eeb]{:target="_blank"} at Princeton University. 
I investigate the origin and evolution of collective organization in biology, primarily using theoretical models.

<!-- more -->

### Research interests

Collective systems -- such as social insect colonies and multicellular organisms -- have evolved multiple times from solitary or unicellular ancestors. In these systems, many individuals
work together to achieve emergent collective functioning. My work aims to
(1) understand how and why collective organizations evolve in the first place, 
(2) understand in what ways evolved collective systems meaningfully differ from each other, 
and (3) explain evolutionarily how those differences in organization arose. 

To study these questions, I primarily employ **simple theoretical models**. 
By virtue of their simplicity, these models are well-suited to generalize across empirical systems and reveal fundamental principles of biological organization. 

See <a href="/publications/">here</a> for an annotated list of past publications.



### Teaching

In addition to doing research, I love to teach. Read more about my teaching <a href="/teaching/">here</a>.

[corina]: https://scholar.princeton.edu/ctarnita
[eeb]: https://eeb.princeton.edu
